let's start with disclaimers so very
important today so
just a reminder that everything we
discussed today on stream is intended to
be for educational purposes only nothing
is intended to be taken as medical
advice if you all have a medical concern
please go see a licensed professional
and seek their individual advice and
this is doubly important today because
what what i'm going to do today is give
you guys
essentially like my sex ed talk this is
a like it's something that i talk about
with patients a lot
so i essentially have like a spiel that
when someone comes to my office and has
concerns or is curious about
uh sexual education like these are the
things that i'll explain to them
um for those of y'all so like it'll be
like these tend to be
patients that are like teenagers or
young adults who may not have like
ever had someone sit down and talk to
them about sex
and like what's normal what's not normal
um you know what's healthy what's
unhealthy like things to watch out for
things to be careful about so it's not
gonna be i know we're doing this on
twitch and i know that
oftentimes people will meme about stuff
they're gonna be a couple of jokes right
because that's just how i teach
but like i just want to emphasize that
really the the goal of of today's
lecture is to just educate people
and i strongly strongly encourage all to
go actually see a licensed professional
if anything that we discuss today seems
to resonate with you
um and it's it's not going to be like
you know like this is how you have sex
it's not like a how-to guide for sexual
intercourse
what it's really what we're going to be
talking about today is is really more
medical in nature it's like helping
people understand like what's normal
what's not normal what should y'all be
watching out for
um
it's kind of like this is what i'd say
you know so like sometimes parents will
ask their kids this question
so i'll give you guys an example of why
i give this talk okay
so parents will ask kids their question
you know are you having sex and the kid
will like if they have a good
relationship the kid will say yes
and then the parent will be like are you
being safe
and then the kid will be like yes
and then that's the end of the
discussion right it's like there's never
like the parent doesn't want to talk
about it the kid doesn't want to talk
about it it's super awkward and it's
like what is the parent what is the kid
going to say in that situation no
like
even if they know they're not being safe
they're probably not going to say that
to begin with
and secondly like they may not have the
same idea of like what safe is
right so we're going to talk about like
what safe is like what are the
components of safe
um so another reason that we're going to
be talking about this today is because
you know as we've
not recently discovered but as we've
known for a while
you know our content people watch this
stream from 65 countries or 70 countries
and a lot of these places don't have uh
you know very robust systems of sexual
education so we're going to try to you
know teach the basics of like sexual
health today
um and so i i you know by all means have
a good time because i think that like
education shouldn't necessarily be like
no laughing aloud you know but at the
same time like let's remember that the
reason we're here is not to look penis
like that's not what we're here for
right we're here to actually or at least
that's not why i'm here
what the reason i'm here is because it's
been my observation that like a lot of
times these
these conversations are actually really
important and we don't have them enough
um you guys can clip that that's fine
it's gonna be the first of many like
don't don't sweat it dude
okay so like let's just try to be
respectful of the topic at hand do we
wanna laugh like absolutely am i gonna
make jokes like hopefully right that's
just how i teach and like i think that's
important and at the same time let's
let's try to like make sure that things
first of all don't get too far and let's
remember that the goal that we're really
here is to like try to learn something
so that we can live like happier
healthier lives okay
so a couple of quick announcements we're
launching parent coaching in one day
so we still have some spots available um
so we only have a uh you know 100 spots
in parent coaching total and so if you
guys are interested you can sign up
there so let's launch into our lecture
so today chat i want to talk to y'all
about
uh
sex ed basically so sexual health so the
way that we're going to talk about this
is it's going to be first of all like
this is going to be primarily like a
medical education lecture so it's like
something that i talk to my patients
about
um it isn't actually like medical advice
so you guys should go talk to your
doctor about things here that seem
important to you
um so we're gonna talk a little bit
about like sexual anxiety and what i
mean by that
is
like a lot of people are worried about
something related to sex
and so i think one of the biggest
uh antidotes to sexual anxiety is
actually education it's one of the few
instances in psychiatry where i think
education actually deals
like a lot of good so like you can get a
lot of benefit just by like educating
people
so in other areas of mental illness
telling depressed people or anxious
people to be less depressed or less
anxious or just let me explain to you
that there are other fish in the sea you
won't be alone for the rest of your life
here the statistics doesn't seem to make
a dent thankfully when it comes to
issues of sexuality the amount of
knowledge or understanding is so low in
general
that education seems to help people an
immense amount so what i'd like to do
today is is to share with you guys some
basic information about like normal
sexuality so like you know basics of
like puberty and things like that basics
of like menstruation and and like uh
hormonal cycles so i think this is
something that not just women but like
men should understand too like we should
understand you know for those of us that
are in relationships with women
like you know what's going on with them
like we don't have to like it's not like
some foreign mystical thing right like
as a man you can understand what's going
on with a menstrual like with a
menstrual cycle like it's just biology
it's physiology and so i think like
equipping people with like that really
basic information seems to help a lot so
some of this is gonna start a little bit
with normal sexuality
then um we're gonna move on a little bit
to safe sex so like what are the
different dimensions of safe sex
um and then we're going to touch on some
other like you know problems that people
may have and we'll review different
kinds of like birth control um you know
different kinds of stis and like why we
use certain things when we have sex
uh it's not going to be like a how-to
guide in terms of like sexual
performance or things like that
we're not going to go into a whole lot
of statistics or details about you know
like erogenous zones or what percentage
of women are able to have like organism
through vaginal intercourse and like all
this kind of stuff um there's a lot more
that we could teach but this is going to
be the basics by the way did you guys
know that uh about 70 of women can have
an orgasm through vaginal intercourse
penetrative intercourse
um so there's a lot of stuff there that
like you know we haven't there's more
detail but like this is basically like
when i get an 18 year old kid in my
office or 17 year old kid
and like this is the sort of the the
essence of what i try to teach them
about birth control safe sex and things
like that
so basically when you know when parents
ask their kids are you having safe sex
and the kid says yes and they don't talk
about like what that actually means
we're gonna try to address that
so the first thing that i kind of
mentioned is that you know this is um
uh
you know the goal of this is to be
educational because i found that
education actually does help a lot
so
um i'm going to tell you all the story
so i one time had a kid and they've
given me permission to share this story
because they shall remain anonymous
but i had a kid come into my office and
um you know we were talking they came in
for other reasons and so as you get to
know people
you know they start to open up to you
about other things and then they had
some anxiety about you know their their
sex like stuff related to sex and in
particular masturbation
so they were like you know i'm afraid
that i'm not going to like be effective
at having sex
and then i ask them well what are you
afraid of and they're like well whenever
i like masturbate i only reach the first
stage of orgasm
and i was kind of confused and i was
like what exactly do you like what is
the first stage of orgasm like help i
was confused by the phrase
and so then you know they're like well i
can only get to like the first part and
i'm like what what do you mean the first
part and he's like well like so i was
like tell me what happens
and then he's like well i reached like
the first stage and then you know like
my erection goes away and like even if i
try it starts to become painful and i
can never get to the stage stage two of
orgasm and so i kind of talk to him and
it seems like so first of all he's able
to get an erection he's able to
masturbate he's able to
um reach as he calls it the first stage
of orgasm that after the first stage of
orgasm
um you know his his penis becomes
flaccid and he like it becomes
uncomfortable for him to continue to
masturbate
so he was kind of thinking that he had
maybe screwed something up or he's been
masturbating this way for a while and
like he can't ever reach the second
stage forecast
and i was like well what what is that
what is like the second stage of orgasm
this is like professionally i'm like
what the [ __ ] you know like i
you know i wasn't actually laughing then
but i was just really like confused in
retrospect we actually both laugh about
it now
but so then he was kind of explaining to
me that like you know when he watches
pornography and like people haven't
orgasm there's like gallons of ejaculate
going everywhere but when he reaches the
first stage of orgasm he has like a
small volume of ejaculate and he can't
ever get to the you know like the fire
hydrant stage of of that he sees in in
pornography
and so like you know it took a little
while for me to realize that like you
know his expectations of what's normal
are shaped by pornography and that's not
really normal right
and so i i tried to i mean i'm still not
entirely sure to this day i mean maybe
he's a different kind of kid and there
are stages of orgasm but
what i understood from that is that he's
actually like achieving orgasm it's just
that's just a regular orgasm and it
doesn't last for like eight minutes
right because like that's the the
perception that they have for from
pornography
um and also like you know they use a lot
of like viagra and other kinds of things
when when they film pornography and
stuff so you just had very very
um unrealistic expectations of what like
a regular sexual experience was like
and you can't really blame the kid
because i think a lot of us
will have unrealistic expectations
because we do learn from things like
pornography it's not like we're you know
most schools don't really have super
robust sexual education classes um some
countries actually actively you know try
to not teach that stuff parents have
difficulty sort of having those
conversations and so like where else is
the kid supposed to learn like is it
kind of funny sure
i mean i get it i thought it would i
mean retrospect i think it's hilarious
but it's also like it's not really like
the kid's fault right it's a consequence
of the society that we we grow up in and
the way that we're educated so today
what i'd like to do is share with you
all you know some basic stuff about like
sex and sexuality
so the first thing is let's just talk
very briefly about like normal sexual
development um so you know sometime
between generally speaking like around
12 or 13 years old
most human beings will enter into a
stage called puberty which is like the
stage of sexual maturation
uh so we'll see like different kinds of
primary and secondary characteristics
for men will see things like um you know
you'll get you'll start to get erections
uh you may have some growth of your
scrotum you'll get the development of
body hair
in different places like your pubic
regions arm armpits face things like
that you'll get a deepening of the voice
there's often times a period where like
you know kids will boys will have like a
voice that cracks
um
you'll see a lot of acne as well and
that's als that's primarily driven by
like hormonal changes during the puberty
time so a lot of people who have trouble
with acne sometimes the acne will
resolve once they're done with the the
hormonal changes
in women you'll also see primary and
sexual secondary sexual characteristics
develop so you'll also see the
development of things like pubic hair
and things like that breast development
the most important thing that uh
you know most women experience is the
onset of menses or menstruation so they
have an ovulatory cycle which we're
going to talk about right now because
this will be important later
so there's like a cycle of ovulation
which results in menstruation and so
menstruation is when
essentially the uterine lining
and then women will start to
essentially bleed right so let's go so
let's kind of talk about this for a
second
so this is where we're gonna get into
the science okay chat
y'all doing okay so far by the way like
are we okay with this
is this too much
okay we okay with that okay
okay you're confused so that's hopefully
we'll fix that in a little bit
the average female menstrual cycle is 28
days
that is because it is lined with lunar
rhythms no it's not aligned with
rhythms it's because of biology
so we start out with
um
so let's actually start in the middle
with ovulation
so there's this thing called a follicle
and a follicle kind of develops and then
we get like a big follicle which has an
egg inside and then at ovulation the egg
comes out after that the follicle kind
of
gets smaller again it degrades and then
over here we have menses
at day 28 or actually over here is
menses at day zero
okay
and so this is like where we have
menstruation so
basically like once we have an egg that
leaves the follicle this is the zone
we've got basically one week where you
can get pregnant
because now we've ovulated we've got an
egg we're ready for the sperm if the
sperm meets the egg
then we will get a
pregnancy right so we'll form like an
embryo or a zygote
and then that follicle will go and
implant in the uterine lining so this is
like let's say this is the uterus here's
the uterine lining here and so this egg
will go over here and implant over here
here are the fallopian tubes
okay
ovaries
so that's kind of what what happens so
over here like if by the end of one week
if we don't have a uterine lining that
has an egg implanted into it essentially
what happens is we get all of this
uterine lining that sheds so this all
goes away
and then kind of comes out as blood so
this is the process of menstruation
and then you kind of
um prepare the whole cycle again
now the next thing to understand about
this whole cycle is that it's hormonally
driven and this is going to become
important when we talk a little bit
about
um
different kinds of birth control okay
so essentially what happens during this
this time is that we've got
um
so we've got this hormone here called
fsh which is going to slowly increase
and then we've got another hormone
called lh which is going to be like
relatively low
um
and then surges over here which triggers
ovulation and then it kind of stays low
again
and so
fsh is is follicle stimulating hormone
so this is going to cause
fsh is what causes these follicles to
grow and so fsh over time is going to
actually kind of go down like once we
have our follicle that's ready to go
then fsh decreases
and then this lh surge that that's in
blue is what triggers off ovulation so
essentially fsh is going to prepare
us for ovulation the lh surge is what
triggers this egg egg leaving
and then both hormones tend to go down
as we enter the luteal phase
and um we end up with menses after that
okay this is going to become important
in a second when we talk a little bit
about birth control okay so let me grab
my notes
so
this is the process of menstruation any
questions
we'll talk about pcos and stuff like
that okay
so menses is the process of shedding the
uterine lining
so like when when an egg does not
implant
let's use purple
so when this process does not happen
okay
so if this egg gets fertilized by a
sperm it'll go and it'll hang out it'll
implant into the wall of the uterus
where it will start to grow into a child
and if that process doesn't happen the
body sort of realizes okay it looks like
we don't have
a
viable embryo
that we can't carry to create a child so
all of this uterine lining that we built
up we're actually going to get rid of
and then we'll start the cycle all over
again
okay so that's what menses is it's
essentially shedding the uterine lining
interesting tidbit
unfortunately menses is one of the only
necrotic processes in the body so when a
cell dies
normally it goes through this this cycle
called apoptosis
which is programmed cell death
interesting aside okay
so
did y'all know that between your fingers
you used to have webbing so our fingers
used to be connected by skin but what
happens when we
when our body is developing is like
there's skin that connects our fingers
and then the body sort of realizes the
skin in the middle realizes hey we don't
need to be here anymore so it actually
goes through a process of programmed
zelda and it dies
so sometimes when cells get old
sometimes if cells get cancerous they'll
actually like auto destruct and the cool
thing about apoptosis is that generally
speaking when it happens it's not
painful it's like a normal thing it's
like basically we're shutting down the
cell
necrosis is different necrosis is what
happens like when i get you know crushed
by like you know a brick
or when i get
damaged in some way
that's like cell death that was not
planned and so necrosis releases a bunch
of inflammatory things
re releases substance p
which causes pain
which is why like menses is so freaking
painful and disco uncomfortable because
it's one of the only necrotic processes
in the body it's essentially like
getting dead like it's taking internal
damage as opposed to like winding things
down which is what apoptosis is so
that's part of the reason why menses is
like tends to be like quite
uncomfortable and quite painful for
women there are other things that kind
of complement complicate that but i
think it's one thing to kind of
understand is like a dude like it helped
me kind of recognize that
you know i don't think we sort of
realize as men we're not taught that
like there's actually like a part of
your partner's body that is like
dying
and it's painful and uncomfortable and
inflammatory and causes like that's why
you get like you know belly pain
abdominal pain discomfort bloating all
that stuff is happening because you have
this necrotic process going on which is
not like as peaceful and organized as
the apoptosis
oh the egg cell is the egg cell necrosis
as well but the egg cell is tiny it's
just once one cell you have a whole
uterine lining
that
is
going to like
essentially die i mean it gets slopped
off right and that's what menses
okay
anyway enough about menses let's move on
you guys have
yeah every month it ain't easy so i
don't think most men you know really
ever experienced something along the
lines of like it's like kind of getting
the flu like on a monthly basis right
it's just like this period of time for
one week where you're just like kind of
feeling crappy and in in some relative
amount of pain it's just and it happens
every day a month
right until menopause which is a whole
other mess
and uncomfortable but okay so basics of
menstruation that's going to become
important in a second because we're
going to talk about birth control
so next thing that we're going to talk
about is like so now that we have a
basic understanding okay so puberty
happens right so people start to develop
women have this hormonal cycle that
results in menses if you have sex during
the week i mean during that one week or
you can even have a little bit before
but you know there's basically a one
week window i'm oversimplifying where a
woman can get pregnant every month okay
and so when we talk about so let's move
on a little bit to safe sex
so like i said earlier a lot of times
parents will ask their kids hey are you
being safe and the kid is like yes
and nowhere do we ever discuss like okay
what are the dimensions of safety so
when i talk to my patients about you
know safe sex i will talk about three or
four different things so one is i will
talk about birth control the second i
will thing i will talk about is stis
because oftentimes those two things get
confused i know it's kind of weird
um the third thing is sometimes we can
talk about pain
uh which is like there are some
conditions that are relatively common
which result in people having
uncomfortable sexual experiences the
challenge with those conditions is that
the person feels like fundamentally
messed up there's a lot of shame
associated with these conditions
so sometimes um
you know people think that they're like
not able to have sex or like that
everyone else is enjoying sex and they
don't enjoy sex it's actually painful
for them so they think that there's
something wrong with them and in a sense
there kind of is because there can be
like a medical problem but it's not like
an issue of like you as a person it's
like your body may be responding to
sexual activity and like uh you know in
a pathologic way so they're actually
conditions that lead to pain during sex
and so sometimes it's about educating
people about that kind of thing so just
to give you guys an example you know i
had a female patient who
um had a lot of difficulty having sex
and it turned out she had a medical
condition but like she didn't realize
that for years she would just
you know try to engage in sexual
relationships with men and found it
incredibly incredibly painful
um and so it was like like she just
thought
like she was busted as like a human she
was like i can't ever you know i can
sexually gratify my partners but it's
like painful every single time i do it i
care about them so much i even love them
and and like but like something's wrong
with me like i can't like i don't know
you know like i can't i don't enjoy it i
feel like vomiting every time i have sex
and it's like you know she comes into my
office and it's like whoa right it's so
hard because she she understands that in
this society like sexual pleasure and
sexual gratification is a part of
relationships she feels really guilty
for like the way that her body responds
and it turns out that there could be a
medical reason for it so that's why we
have conversations like this okay
and then the dude too is like like he's
kind of at a loss as well this was a
situation where i talked to her partner
her fiance as well and and so like he
was kind of like you know i want to
respect her boundaries so i'm totally
fine
um you know not having sex and then like
he's willing to
give it up and then she feels super bad
and he feels super bad and like no one
feels good about anything
right it's despite all of the love and
all of the caring everyone's just like
stressed and nothing's going well and
they don't know if they're ever gonna
have kids and all this kind of stuff so
this is why like a little bit of
education actually goes a long way okay
so let's talk about
the different dimensions of
safe sex okay
so i don't know if we're going to get to
things like consent
but let's talk about
safe sex
so the first thing that we're going to
talk about so when you have safe sex the
first thing that you need to watch out
for is stis or sexually transmitted
infections okay so when we talk about
stis so for those of you that don't know
there are bacterial infections
and there are viral infections
okay so oftentimes bacterial infections
are things like gonorrhea
chlamydia
stuff like cis uh
syphilis
okay so so like oftentimes these
bacterial infections will cause things
like pain
discharge which is exactly what it
sounds like it's like there's like posts
or goop coming out of your sexual organs
the good news about bacterial infections
is that like we can basically treat it
with antibiotics
okay
so this is what's super sad is that if
you get a bacterial infection like you
can just take a course of antibiotics
just like get yourself some bactrim or
something like that and then in like six
or seven days the infection will be
cleared you'll be totally fine
okay and it's like not that big of a
deal
um generally speaking there isn't any
long-term damage this is why it's also
incredibly sad that people are not
educated to this kind of stuff so if you
do have a bacterial infection
what will happen a lot of times is like
you're let's assume a male patient for a
second your penis will start to hurt
it'll become red or swollen you'll start
to get goop coming out of it right
discharge
we're not going to show pictures
but
you know and then what happens is you
get embarrassed
and like you're like oh god like what is
wrong with me like what will people
think like will anyone find out and so
your embarrassment causes you to not
seek medical care and you're like i hope
it'll go away it's the tried and true
it's the first
you know medical intervention that most
human beings make the first medical
choice that most human beings make is i
hope it goes away because it's cool
because our body like takes care of most
things right you get a mosquito bite
it's not like you need to do anything
your body will take care of it you
sprain your ankle it's not like your
body you need to do anything but other
body will take care of it if you have
diarrhea or you start vomiting you get
fever like i'm just gonna like you
you're hungover you get drunk you know
you're you're like i'll just my body
will take care of it so a lot of people
will just let their body take care of it
that's a terrible idea when it comes to
stis especially bacterial ones because
you can take a seven course seven day
course of antibiotics and you could be
fixed but instead what will happen and
i've seen this and it's super sad
syphilis is a good example of like
penicillin treats syphilis okay
but like when people don't treat
syphilis and syphilis is also kind of
interesting because it actually presents
with something called a shanker which is
like a sore on let's say the penis that
is non-painful so like you wake up one
day and you're like there's like a
little like dot on your dick
and then like over time like the dot
grows and then you're like well that's
kind of weird it doesn't hurt or
anything it's just just a weird like
it's like an ulcer on the penis
and then you know it can even go away
and then people like okay fine or like
it'll come come and go but it doesn't
really hurt people won't take care of it
and so then syphilis can spread to
places like your spinal cord and like
cause nerve damage and like all this
other kind of terrible stuff and the sad
thing is that it's like super treatable
so generally speaking you know if you
have sex with someone and then something
weird happens to your genitals they
start to hurt you or you start to see
weird marks on them or things like that
go see a doctor
okay
now what's a little bit more troubling
we'll get to what what else to do about
this in a second so what's more
troubling is viral infections so herpes
is a good example of this
hiv is something that people are uh you
know understandably concerned about
so
the these are kind of interesting
because these are lifelong so once you
get a viral infection of herpes it's
never gonna i mean
the infection will stay there forever
something like hiv two is a lifelong
illness so once you catch it you know
you got it
so there are a couple of interesting
things though when it comes to herpes
and we're going to go off on an
interesting tangent here as well and
this has to do with viral evolution
so if we kind of think about let's say
i'm a virus
okay
these are spike proteins it's not a sun
if i'm a virus like and i infect a human
being
i've got a couple of different
strategies right like i can be very very
infectious
and then kill the human being
like let's say i'm ebola
right i can like kill a human being and
then like in the process i'm bleeding
and stuff and i infect other human
beings
but generally speaking these are not the
most successful viruses what's super
successful
is herpes
and so what herpes does is like kind of
bothers you but doesn't really affect
your survival
and so essentially what happens is some
viruses that we get will actually like
become relatively dormant and not too
much of a pain in the ass so i think
somewhere between 25 and 40 percent of
like the human population has herpes
and then you so you'll get these like
sores that will come and go so you'll
get like flares of herpes and then you
can start medication during those time
that will reduce the sores and stuff
like that but for many people like i
think maybe even 20 of people will never
be symptomatic or maybe 40 of people
will never be symptomatic with herpes so
they'll never have a sore or anything
like that the virus is just hanging out
in your body and you can even
potentially have a period of what's
called asymptomatic shedding so this is
something else to know about herpes um
is that even if you don't have any
active virus you can still transmit it
to other people
hiv is sort of the same way so remember
that hiv leads to something called aids
right which is acquired immune
autoimmune acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome
and so for many many years before people
develop aids they will have active viral
replication and can spread it to other
people
so aids is a so hiv is a virus that
attacks your immune cells and so aids is
not actually direct damage from the
virus what happens is hiv destroys your
immune system and then you get all of
these infections that like normally
human beings don't have to deal with
because your immune system just takes
care of them
it's kind of like you know if you're
playing a video game and and you can
normally like you know you're playing at
a high mmr and then someone goes and
unplugs your mouse and your keyboard and
then suddenly you start losing the noobs
like the reason you're losing to noobs
is because you can no longer play the
game that's why hiv is such a
devastating disease because it it
cripples your body's ability to actually
fight it
the key to thing to remember for this
scope of of this talk is first of all
even if you've never had symptoms of
these things you can still have them
right so this is like safety point
number one
with viral
stis
you can be asymptomatic
and still have it
and still spread it
right your partner can even be
asymptomatic and you can still have it
so this is why like if you've had we'll
talk about this in a second if you've
ever had you know sex with a with
another human being
without a condom or a female condom or
something like that then you are at risk
of having an sti the only really case
that i can think of where that's
unlikely is that both of you have never
had sex with anyone else and even then
in rare situations you can get viral
transmission of things like hiv during
birth and stuff like that if your mom
had it or whatever but usually like
doctors know about that because we test
about we test that kind of thing before
mothers give birth
but generally speaking if your partner
has ever had sex without a condom with
anyone and you have had sex without a
condom with anyone
you are at risk of having a viral sti so
this is where like everyone
should get tested
right because you never know like if
your partner is lying to you or honest
or whatever so generally speaking for
young sexually active patients i
recommend they get tested at a minimum
of once per year
depending on how high risk you are you
can get tested even more
okay
so next thing to kind of think about is
all right so like how do we prevent
these things so this is where the the
condom comes in
so the condom is the best uh protective
barrier against you know transmission of
both bacterial and viral infections
so wearing a condom has two goals so
condom is to protect against stis
and actually it's it's interesting how
many people don't realize this
i personally find it my mind-boggling
but
you know it just speaks to how
our systems of education are and the
second is to prevent pregnancy
and these
are two distinct
goals okay
so this is where like you know i've had
patients
that
you know will be like oh yeah so like i
hooked up with a girl and i was like
okay were you safe and they were like
yeah
and i then i asked the question like
what do you you know what do you mean
it's like oh like i asked her she's on
the pill it's like not a big deal right
so like safe sometimes people mean like
getting pregnant
and sometimes they mean like protecting
against an sti
and it's like so then i'll ask my
patient i was like did you actually use
a condom and he's like no i didn't need
to because she's on birth control it's
like not a big deal
right and even for people who are like
not even in the hookup stage i'll talk
to people who are in like monogamous
relationships yeah i've been dating a
girl for a year we used condoms for the
first six months
and then like you know then we stopped
using condoms because she was on the
pill
and like you know i trust her and it's
like okay fine even if you trust her has
she ever had sex without a condom with
anyone else have you ever had sex
without a condom with anyone else
and has has she ever been tested and
have you ever been tested the fact that
you're asymptomatic does not mean that
you know she could have asymptomatic hiv
you could have asymptomatic hiv
so condoms are the best way to protect
against stis um outside of you know
abstinence and stuff like that
and so that's really our goal so like
just thinking about you know dr k's like
two things that you should talk to a
doctor about
one is that if you've had
sex with another human being
without a condom
and both of you all are not virgins and
even if they say they're a virgin
because you you never really know right
it's it's a good thing to just go ahead
and get tested it's a cheap test most
doctors will order it just so you'll
have the peace of mind
um and then when you you know if you do
have sex with someone use a condom
because even if they're on birth control
like you just don't know
what they've got so like gonorrhea and
chlamydia too can be asymptomatic for a
while
and that's like how they spread right
because it's not like they
you know
like
they're they're actively replicating and
like there's not discharge and pain
coming out of your penis or your vagina
and then like then you have sex with
someone and then like they transmit it
here you transmit it and then you get it
and that's how it works okay questions
about stis
okay next thing we're going to talk
about is birth control
okay
so the first thing to understand is that
there are many kinds of birth control
now dr k is rusty on my statistics but
i'm just i think this is right but i
haven't really checked these statistics
in like 15 years
so methods of birth control number one
the pull-out method
so if you guys remember
there is a menstrual cycle
right so what some people will do is
like they'll you know
try to time it so this is the timing
method where we're only going to have
sex when
you know during the three weeks that
we're not ovulating so that's number one
pull out is number two which is like you
know if the dude doesn't ejaculate
in the vagina then you know that's a
method of birth control so i want to say
that
the pull out method is like 60 to 70
effective
so what does this mean so about last
time i checked which was some time ago
the statistics that i'm going to cite
are to be if a couple is having sex over
the course of the year
what is the likelihood they will wind up
pregnant or not uh yeah so let's let's
look at it this way
so this is efficacy
and what efficacy means is preventing
pregnancy
okay and so this is like you know
100 minus this number is the percent
chance that you'll get pregnant
over
one year
okay so what this means is like 30 to 40
percent of people who use the pull out
method will get pregnant i think the
timing method two is like pretty bad
it's like maybe a little bit higher i
don't really remember the exact
statistic so 20 to 30 percent of people
who like you know use this method will
still wind up pregnant if you have sex
over the course of a year and what some
people may be saying is about like the
pull out method doesn't that you know
what's up with that like so what are the
factors so the first is that
sometimes before you actually like have
an orgasm and ejaculate you'll actually
release some degree of semen so there's
like um you know there's the
pre-ejaculate which can sometimes have
semen so that's one thing the other
thing the other reason why it is so
effective because still at the end of
the day like two out of three people
that use the pull-out method at the end
of the year won't be pregnant and that's
because remember that you know 75 of the
time a woman isn't actually like 75 of
days of the year the average woman is
not able to get pregnant right so what
we're kind of talking about is like a
series of like you know
confluence of events so first of all she
has to be in the ovulatory window and
then like you have to have maybe
pre-ejaculate or sometimes you screw up
or like don't screw up like even if you
screw up there's a 75 chance that
their your partner's not going to get
pregnant right so that also depends on
things like frequency of sex and things
like that
so these pull out method timing method i
don't recommend them
next thing to think about is condoms
so condoms are actually 90 effective
at preventing pregnancy and what is that
how does that work well so it turns out
that a big part of like condom
effectiveness is like user error
so what this sort of means is that if i
have a partner and i'm going to uh okay
we're lagging if i have sex for the over
the course of a year
um
and
like 9 out of 10 people who use condoms
and have sex over the course of the year
won't wind up with a pregnancy 10 of
them will
okay so like some of this is like it's a
little bit unclear exactly what's
happening i don't think that generally
speaking you know condoms are faulty
there you know some people will store
them in places like their wallet or
things like that where it may degrade
like the the latex barrier or things
like that um i think that these are if
if memory serves these are like pretty
naturalistic studies so essentially what
they do
is they'll ask like
you know hundred people do you have sex
and they'll say yes and they'll say like
you know did you did you get pregnant or
do you use a condom they'll say yes and
they'll say like did you get pregnant
and then 10 of people will say yes
so we kind of rate the efficacy of
condoms at 90
okay
um which is actually terrifying to me
personally
so next thing to kind of think a little
bit about is
the birth control pill
so what the birth control pill basically
is is
estrogen
and progesterone
but there are
progesterone only versions
and the birth control pill i think is
something like you know 95 to 97
effective
so we're talking about three to five
percent pregnancy rate
and the key thing about the pill is you
basically are taking hormones for three
weeks out of the month
and then i if memory serves properly
there's like one week where
you know it's it's not quite placebo but
there's a dif they're different hormonal
formulations that will allow you to
menstruate and basically the way that
birth control pills work is we're adding
estrogen and progesterone which by the
way this follicle produces progesterone
and you know these hormonal things are
creating estrogen
so essentially what happens is like
when you have progesterone and estrogen
floating around
these are going to block
production of gnrh which in turn
will block
production of fsh and lh
right so for those of y'all that are
kind of familiar with this basically the
way that our our body works
is through hormonal feedback loops
and so if estrogen and progesterone are
low
gnrh from our hypothalamus gonadotropin
releasing hormone will increase which
will cause these to increase and as
these increase will go towards ovulation
and as we go to ovulation we're going to
produce more progesterone so then this
then goes up and then once this goes up
this goes down you guys see it's like a
feedback loop
okay so we can draw it out over here
real quick
so we've got gnrh
increases fsh
and lh this is a little bit of a
simplification causes ovulation
which in turn creates progesterone
right and these are actually going to
create estrogen over here too let's go
this way
and then these in turn go and block
this
right so so it's it's like a feedback
loop where
the greater this is eventually it'll
produce downstream hormones that will
reduce this growth and as we reduce this
growth the inhibition decreases and it
increases gnrh that's how our body like
balances things so if we think about
things like our blood pressure right so
how does our body maintain a blood
pressure of 120 over 80. it has a system
of feedback loops you have things like
baroreceptors
so what a barrel receptor does is
measures the stretch
within your blood vessels and so if
there if the pressure is greater it's
going to stretch more
activate the baroreceptor and cause you
to decrease the strength at which your
heart pumps which will reduce the amount
of stretch in your blood vessels which
will then tone down the signal on the
baroreceptor you guys with me or is that
like too complicated
you guys get that
no
okay
okay the the general principle is
there's a feedback loop
right like everything like so our body
maintains a blood pressure of 120 over
80 because it's got like signals that
make sure that if we if we go below 120
or 80 over 80 we'll increase our blood
pressure and we have ways of detecting
that
and if we go above 120 over 80 we have
ways of detecting that and we'll drop
our blood pressure
okay
we'll talk about mood and stuff in a
second all right so let's go back
so why is birth control only 95 to 97
percent effective once again it's user
error
so generally speaking if you're taking
your birth control properly and you're
taking it on time and stuff like that it
is theoretically close to 100 percent
effective but it turns out that human
beings sometimes don't take their pills
on time they miss a day whatever
and so if you don't take your pills
properly
you have a three to five percent chance
of getting
uh pregnant
so then
um after that what we've got is the
patch or the implant
so then what people decided is we're
going to develop essentially a birth
control patch or implant
so what this is is it's like something
that you can get like
like on your arm usually like under the
skin like an implant that will release
progesterone estrogen and progesterone
and i think these are essentially 99
effective so once you remove user error
from the equation
99 times out of 100 like people won't be
able to get pregnant
okay
um so this is where like you know the
hormones themselves are gonna are damn
near perfect it's just the you know once
you force people to take pills it
becomes problematic so for example
this is why you should you should
actually consult with a doctor like if i
have a patient with adhd
i'm going to you know talk to them about
getting a patch or an implant over the
pills because if you've got adhd your
likelihood of user error and forgetting
to take pills is greater now this is a
conversation with the person i've had a
lot of patients with adhd that like they
may forget everything else in the
universe but the one thing that they
always take like clockwork is gonna be
their birth control medication so it's
not like necessarily like adhd people
can't take birth control meds it's just
you have to have a conversation and this
is where the individualization of your
condition like is important okay
then the last thing that we're going to
talk about is an iud or not last thing
but the last birth control for women
outside of surgery is an iud so this is
an intrauterine device so remember
over here what an intrauterine device is
is they take like a
a piece of like they stick a device into
the uterus now remember that the uterus
is like beyond the vagina right so
here's the cervix
which is like the gatehouse to the
uterus and then here's the vagina
so it's something that's implanted
within the uterus so oftentimes these
devices are made of copper
and since they're copper they actually
cause inflammation
in the uterine wall and this
inflammation in the uterine wall
prevents the egg from being able to
implant so you can actually create a
fertilized egg but it just can't ever
implant into the uterine wall so it's
never going to grow you're never going
to get pregnant
so
iuds come in just the copper variety or
copper plus hormone usually progesterone
and these are also like ninety nine
point nine percent effective
maybe it's nine it's greater than let's
i don't know that it's 99.9 i actually
don't know
but
they're also removable so the the copper
one lasts for about five years or maybe
longer actually i think the copper one
may last longer the hormonal one so it
also
releases progesterone which if we go
back up here we remember that it's this
progesterone that essentially acts as
your body's internal birth control so
when we take birth control pills we're
actually like trying to simulate this
thing that prevents you from getting
pregnant
okay so for example
um and the the term progesterone means
progestation so even the placenta will
release progesterone to prevent like you
from ovulating while you're pregnant if
that kind of makes sense
okay
so these are 99 effective you know
they're in your body for i'm a little
bit rusty on this i think the the
hormonal one is five years
the copper one may be more it may be
like ten years i'm not entirely sure
um
but this is basically you know so you
have a one percent chance or less of
getting pregnant
so if you are a young sexually active
woman who doesn't want to worry about
anything and is not planning on getting
pregnant for about five years this is
what i would recommend so for most of my
patients when they ask me dr k what kind
of birth control should i take
unless they've got other factors which
we'll talk about in a second like
basically like iuds are great because
you kind of fire and forget
and then when you're ready to get
pregnant you can take it out right or
you have to change it out every five
years so it tends to be like very very
like you know there's no hormones being
put in even with implants and patches
you have to kind of get them changed
it's like you go once you get an
appointment you get an iud like they're
really fantastic
so outside of this we also have um
[Music]
procedures right so we have tubal
ligation
which is getting your tubes tied
which is damn near 100 effective
and then we also have vasectomy
which is
close to 100 effectiveness
and what this is when you have a tubal
ligation remember that
the follicle starts here
in your ovaries and it travels down the
tube
and then will like ovulate and so a
tubal ligation is basically closing this
off
and so then your ovaries can never
the the follicles and eggs from your
ovaries can never get to your uterus
which basically makes it impossible for
you to get pregnant now there are some
risks uh with tubal ligation like
sometimes you can have like um you know
an ectopic pregnancy and stuff like that
but that's kind of beyond the scope of
this an ectopic pregnancy is a pregnancy
that implants somewhere outside of the
uterus so sometimes you can even get
implantation of an egg over here in the
fallopian tube and that can be really
dangerous
but it's quite rare
so and then vasectomy is when um you
know men will essentially have so we've
got
you know our scrotum
and then we've got tubes
that connect to our
penis
and so a vasectomy is when we kind of
slip the snip these
so that the sperm can never get into the
penis and yes this is a bad penis on
purpose
i'm sure i could draw a slightly better
anatomical penis but i'm choosing not to
okay chat
because [ __ ] y'all
okay
okay so so vasectomy and tubal ligation
so some of these can also be
um
they can be like reversible to a certain
degree but generally speaking when
you're done having kids and you never
want kids again this is like the the
birth control of choice
okay
so questions about
birth control
okay
and then if you want a troll if you guys
want to get into it then there's also
there's another
um
100 percent
effectiveness of birth control which is
being challenger rank at league of
legends
right this is something that is a male
birth control that results in 100
percent efficacy of pregnancy prevention
we good
[Laughter]
[Music]
okay
so uh okay so that's that's birth
control so you guys get that so like
okay big picture for a second
all right so when we talk about safe sex
two major dimensions of safety
one is stis
key thing to remember about stis
they can be asymptomatic for a while and
you can still transmit and get them so
if you've been sexually active without a
condom
you should probably get tested at a
minimum of like once a year for patients
that i have that are more high risk i'll
recommend more frequent testing
um so
best way to protect against stis are to
get a co to use condoms the other thing
that i recommend in terms of like safe
sex is like if you don't want to use a
condom you get tested your partner gets
tested you guys are in a trusting i
ideally monogamous relationship you're
in a poly relationship i guess it's fine
as long as everyone gets tested so
everyone within your sexual group
gets tested and is going to be exclusive
with each other so you can't get
contamination from the outside
and then once you have birth control
like you can start to you know have sex
without a condom no big deal
second reason we use condoms are to
um
prevent
pregnancy right but that's when we open
things up to birth control so condoms
tend to be the number one male form of
birth control vasectomy is quite extreme
um and then you know like there are lots
of other forms that primarily have to be
on the woman's side
and uh those tend to be
you know like a lot of people will start
the pill
um the birth control pill which you know
you have to take every day there can be
implants you guys can do things like
iuds so you just have to figure out you
know what's the right move for you and
what you're comfortable with
okay so having safe sex in summary i
think involves like two things
one is like protecting against stis the
second is protecting against pregnancy
yeah you can also do shots so there's
like other forms of birth control and
stuff like this isn't complete by any
means so for example we didn't talk
about fungal infections this can be kind
of annoying because like a woman can
have a fungal infection you can pass it
to a man the woman's will self-resolve
and then the man gets it and then passes
it back to the woman you can like pass
it back and forth
um
so yeah
okay
now what we're gonna do is talk a little
bit i see that there's some questions
we'll get to those in a second so now
we're gonna get to a couple of common
conditions
um that i think like
people
tend to deal with
so a lot of these conditions so this is
like the normal sexual stuff and then
there are a lot of things that people
will deal with
that are
that result in pain and discomfort
that they're kind of not aware of and
educating about them educating about
these conditions can be really helpful
at having like a healthy sexual
relationship okay so the first is we're
going to talk about phimosis
and vaginismus
so phimosis so for those of you that
don't know here's a bad penis drawing
again
there is this thing called the foreskin
which is like a piece of skin that kind
of covers the penis
and when
when the
when the penis becomes erect
the force like you know the penis kind
of
it's gonna
the penis elongates
right and then the foreskin kind of
hangs back over here
so there's actually a condition called
phimosis
where
the
the foreskin is basically like very
tight and you can't really pull it back
so when you get an erection like you
can't
open up the foreskin and you can like
the penis has difficulty like expanding
out as it fills with blood so what this
basically results in is like painful
erections
so formosus thankfully is like quite
rare
usually involves like some kind of
scarring or accident
with the foreskin where it develops scar
tissue so it's not as flexible as it
used to be
but like
can
result in a lot of you know shame and
like oh my god like i can't get an erect
or my penis is small or like it hurts so
much every time i get erect so i you
know i have to stay away from women and
like or men or you know
um so that's
you know phimosis is just an example of
like a rare condition the reason i bring
it up is simply because there are like
biological reasons like if something
involving
your sexual organs feels very very
uncomfortable to you or painful like go
see a doctor right because you could be
one of the few unlucky people that has
phimosis what's a little bit more common
is vaginismus
and this is a spasm
of
essentially like the outer muscles
of the vagina
so what that means is like when you have
a muscle spasm so remember that you know
the outside of the vagina has lots of
muscles and so when they spasm and
contract
it like they they contract and like
nothing can enter
so a lot of times what will happen is
you'll get you know a lot of contraction
and spasm
which means that anything that if you
try to have penetrative sex you're going
to get a ton of pain
and then like the the problem with
vaginismus is that there appear to be
there are different kinds of treatments
for it so you can you can do things like
uh vaginal dilators
also things like psychotherapy can be
effective
so we know that like vaginismus does
have a mental component sometimes you'll
have people with a history of trauma who
develop vaginismus
and so vaginal dilators are like you
know using these particular devices that
will slowly allow
the the spasm to kind of relax
so it takes a lot of time and effort but
this too leads to a lot of you know
shame
self-worth issues
like leads to a lot of relationship
problems because the woman doesn't know
what's wrong with her like it just hurts
a lot every time she has sex and she
loves this person and she wants to have
a relationship with them the dude is
kind of like doesn't know what to do
about it they're kind of confused people
will try lube because they're like okay
maybe it's an issue of lube so the point
here is that if you're having pain or
discomfort during sexual intercourse you
should go see a medical professional
because it's not that you're
fundamentally busted or broken or
whatever
it's it's just that you know like there
may be actually something medical going
on
um
so other conditions that you know cause
pain this isn't really related to to sex
directly but endometriosis i'm just kind
of including
so some women will have endometriosis
which is
the presence of this uterine tissue
do you remember this uterine tissue over
here
in places outside of the uterus so
sometimes you'll get a spot
of
uh uterine tissue here sometimes you can
even get it in the abdomen so you can
get it like outside of the uterus
and then what happens is when you go
through the necrotic
phase of menstruation
this stuff because remember this is all
mediated by hormones right and hormones
travel all over your body so you get all
these spots of uterine tissue that start
dying like all over your abdomen it's
incredibly incredibly painful
and so like some women are just really
really surprised by like how bad
menstruation is like they're in tons of
pain it feels like the pain is even like
outside of the uterine area and so
endometriosis is a very very unfortunate
condition that causes like a lot of pain
so people are also asking about
you know menstrual cycles and mental
health there are lots of good
correlations there their patients that
i've had that starting them on birth
control is like helps their depression
so i'll use birth control as an
adjunctive medication to treat their
depression because there are mood
fluctuations with all these hormonal
fluctuations other things that i'll do
with people who have really really bad
pmdd which is pre-menstrual dysphoric
disorder um or not necessarily pmdd but
you know who have like menstrual like
really really bad periods and really
really bad moods sometimes i'll actually
send them for an endometriosis
evaluation because sometimes the reason
that your mood is so damn bad is because
like there are parts of your body that
are dying like scattered throughout your
abdomen and it just hurts like hell and
so you're like you're cranky and you
don't feel like doing anything and you
kind of get sad and depressed and you
even get a little bit of the ptsd so
that next month rolls around you're like
oh my god it's gonna happen again and it
happens again and again and again and
again and again and again and again
and so like endometriosis i kind of
include it for the sake of completeness
it's not really like a sexual problem
it's not really related to sex i just
include it as like something that
happens to people that's relatively
common that can affect your mood can
affect a lot of stuff around
menstruation and you're you know you
feel like having sex or don't feel like
having sex
kind of a psa
um other conditions that you know people
will kind of mention this is sort of a
random smattering so it's not like i've
picked the most common
so hypoestrogenism
um is a good example of something that
leads to like vaginal dryness
so this is like another thing that's
filled with lots of shame and self-worth
issues is that some women
have either a low level of estrogen or
low response to estrogen in the vaginal
tissue which results in dryness if
there's dryness there can be pain during
intercourse so you know treatment for
this is just things like using
lubricants
um sometimes even starting birth control
can help
right
and so there's just a lot of things out
there that can make
sex painful or uncomfortable and as long
as we know because what tends to happen
like psychologically let's just talk
about this for a second if you don't
know about any of this stuff
and
you just hear that sex is amazing and
everyone's getting laid on tinder and
whatnot and like people romanticize that
in movies and tv shows and if you're
netflix producer you sprinkle in random
sexual scenes in places that they don't
belong for i don't understand why but
whatever
um
and and then like what happens is like
there's there's a societal perception of
what you know what sex is supposed to be
like
and and so like if you don't live up to
that societal perception it results in
like lots of shame because you're like
i'm kind of screwed up right so other
good examples of that are like you know
things like penis size
where
you know a lot of people are concerned
about the size of their penis
um even i've unfortunately made fun of
people with micro penis in the past it's
something that i regret
and the truth is like i don't know if
you guys know this but there are these
people called lesbians and they're able
to have healthy sexual lives and they
actually don't even have penises at all
they have like the tiniest penises on
the planet and they actually do fine
and so it turns out that like you know
penis size is actually like not that
important
um so even if people you know there's a
lot of stuff involving shame and
self-worth and people like feeling like
their body isn't good enough and it
turns out that having a healthy sexual
relationship
is
you know it's just about really
understanding like yourself
understanding your body understanding
your partner it doesn't come down to
you know the size of your penis or any
other like arbitrary characteristic
so just keep that in mind
okay the last thing that we're going to
cover today
um
is just like a couple of
surprisingly common sexual problems so
we're going to talk about premature
ejaculation
and death grip syndrome
this one
is an actual medical thing
this one is something that dr k made up
but i see way too much
okay so let's talk about this
so premature ejaculation is when people
ejaculate very quickly
at the end of the day there are a lot of
different things that you can do there's
a lot of you know shame associated with
premature ejaculation as well
there are treatments for it so oddly
enough you can start people on ssris for
uh premature ejaculation so one of the
side effects of ssris which are
antidepressant or anti-anxiety
medication
is that like they make it harder for you
to climax so sometimes you can even use
this with people who prematurely
ejaculate if they start an ssri like
they can essentially last longer
other things that you can do is you can
you know wear a condom so that reduces
the amount of feeling you have and
things like that
there's just other just like general
things that you can do for premature
ejaculation you can use mental
distraction i know it's kind of weird
but you can think about video games
while having sex and that'll actually
like help you last longer because your
mind won't be so into the sex
um it's difficult to do but it does work
and then there are other things that you
can do just as you start to have sex on
a more regular basis as you get to know
your partner oftentimes premature
ejaculation will actually i i swear guys
i'm not trolling you i'm serious so
there's actually like you can use mental
distraction and think about non-sexual
things right because if we think about
the process of arousal and ejaculation
and climax
like arousal is a huge part of it right
you don't just walk around ejaculating
right like i realized that some of y'all
are gonna punish me for saying that but
it's true
so the the truth is
[ __ ] me
such a bad
so the truth is that arousal has a lot
to do with reaching climax and so you
can use mental distraction
to reduce your internal state of arousal
and will allow you to ejaculate later
interestingly enough they're also like
techniques of tantric meditation
which we can talk about in a second
that also can help people with premature
ejaculation
uh other things that you can do for
premature ejaculation i know it's kind
of weird but i've seen a lot of
self-resolution
in committed relationships
so just like slowing things down and
almost like training yourself so like
training yourself with your partner as
you get close kind of slowing down
taking a step back like restarting like
you can just sort of like retrain
kind of behaviorally like your body's
response like almost in a biofeedback
way
if with kind of time and effort and
dedication
death grip syndrome is something else
entirely and this is where
um when people masturbate for a long
period i'm talking about men so when
they masturbate for long periods of time
especially without lube
and you know using
hand and like for years and years and
years what happens is you can also like
train your nerves to respond to a
particular kind of
um
stimulation to reach climax
and so when it's kind of bizarre but
some people who like let's say you like
you've never had sex and you've been
masturbating for 10 to 15 years and then
you have intercourse for the first time
and the sensations provided by
intercourse are actually quite different
from what your body has gotten used to
so you know the the the lubrication and
the pressure and things like that it
tends to be a little bit less than what
you can do with your the lubrication is
greater and the pressure can be less
which results in a different physical
uh sensation which results in a
difficulty to attain climax through
sexual intercourse
this too can be sort of fixed through
training
so the first thing is that you know
using lube
and a lighter grip
it's gonna feel kind of weird because a
lot of people that you
you know who go through this experience
will like it kind of feels unsatisfying
to masturbate in that way but like you
kind of gotta do that or you can start
to have more sex and then your body will
reacclimatize
aren't these a solution to one another
sort of right so they're kind of like
opposites
um
all right so that's kind of like just a
couple of random other things so this
this lecture is by no means complete
but when it comes to you know people
that come into my office and we try to
talk about safe sex we haven't really
talked about consent really at all which
i i think maybe is just a whole other
lecture because we've been at this for
over an hour and 15 minutes now
um
but
the the goal is is really to just share
with you all some like basic information
about like sexual education
it's not to be meme-ish which i know we
did but
it's really just to empower yourselves
to understand a couple of basic things
one is like what does safe sex mean
from an sti perspective from a pregnancy
perspective
second is
uh you know what are some common
problems that people will run across and
the main message there is not for you
guys to self-diagnose
you know is not to diagnose yourself
with these things but to recognize that
if you have any kind of pain any kind of
discomfort if something about your
understanding your perception of what
sex should be like
is you have a perception of sex and you
have like an actual experience of sex
and those don't line up one of the first
things you should do is go see a medical
professional because it turns out that
there's all kinds of stuff
from vaginal spasm
to you know premature ejaculation to
hypoestrogenism
um to phimosis there's like all kinds of
stuff like this is by no means a
complete list right so they're like
they're actual doctors who will train
for four years to become you know
ob gyns so obstetrics and gynecology and
this is what they specialize in so they
like you know they understand everything
about
gynecology getting pregnant the
complications of pregnancy birth control
all that kind of stuff so i'm a
psychiatrist it's not like actually my
area of expertise
and so you know determining what the
right move is for you like involves
first of all getting a good diagnostic
evaluation if you're running into any of
these problems
second thing is to you know make the
right choice for you in terms of birth
control and like safe sexual habits and
stuff like that which is also highly
individualized i sort of mentioned adhd
there are other things that are really
important to know so for example birth
control pills have a high
increase your risk of having stroke and
ischemic
problems like ischemic strokes and
things like that and clots
so basically like they make your blood
more likely to clot and so if you have a
clot in a blood vessel in your brain
you're going to have a stroke so a
stroke stroke is when a portion of your
brain doesn't receive enough blood and
then actually dies
so
you know
uh birth control pills increase your
risk of stroke so they're not really
recommended in people over 35
they are also compound with cigarette
smoking so if you smoke cigarettes and
you're on birth control pills
they will like drastically increase your
risk of stroke
there are also other like details which
we kind of didn't go into here for
example like birth control pills tend to
be dosed based in a particular weight
range so if you're outside of that
weight range the birth control may not
be as effective which means that your
your likelihood of getting pregnant
could actually increase depending on
your weight so there are all these
different medical complications or not
not complications in terms of bad things
but the the medical decision making is
quite complicated which is why you all
should go see a doctor about it okay
you